TITLE: PYTHON DATA STRUCTURES

PURPOSE:
To explain how to store and manage collections of data using lists, tuples, sets, and dictionaries.

WHAT IS IT?
Data structures are specialized formats for organizing and storing data. Instead of creating a hundred different variables for a hundred names, you put them all inside one data structure.

WHY IS IT USEFUL?
Different tasks require different organizations. If you want a checklist in order, use a List. If you need a fast lookup (like a phone book), use a Dictionary.

CORE CONCEPTS:

List: Ordered, changeable (mutable). Uses square brackets [].

Tuple: Ordered, unchangeable (immutable). Uses parentheses ().

Set: Unordered, unique items only. Uses curly braces {}.

Dictionary (dict): Key-value pairs. Unordered, changeable. Uses curly braces {key: value}.

Indexing: Grabbing one item using its position (starting at 0).

Slicing: Grabbing a chunk of items (e.g., items 2 through 5).

Mutation: Changing the data after it is created.

Membership: Checking if something is inside (using the "in" keyword).

SIMPLE EXPLANATION:

List: A train where each car holds an item in a specific order.

Tuple: A train that has been welded shut. You can look at the items, but you can't add or remove them.

Set: A basket of balls. No duplicates allowed, and you don't care about order.

Dictionary: A row of labeled lockers. You use the label (key) to open the locker and get the item (value).

CODE EXAMPLES:

List (Ordered, Changeable):
fruits = ["apple", "banana", "cherry"]
fruits.append("orange")  # Adds to the end
print(fruits[0])         # Outputs "apple"

Dictionary (Key-Value):
user = {
"name": "Alice",
"role": "admin"
}
print(user["name"])      # Lookup by key, outputs "Alice"
user["age"] = 30         # Adding a new key-value pair

Membership check:
if "banana" in fruits:
print("Found the banana!")

COMMON MISTAKES:

Index out of range (IndexError): Trying to get item number 10 from a list that only has 3 items. Remember, counting starts at 0!

Missing Key (KeyError): Trying to lookup a dictionary key that doesn't exist. Use the .get() method to avoid crashes (e.g., user.get("age")).

Trying to change a Tuple: Tuples cannot be appended to or modified once created.

WHEN TO USE:

List: When order matters and you need to add/remove items.

Tuple: When you have a fixed set of items that should never change.

Set: When you want to remove duplicates from a list very quickly.

Dictionary: When you want to look up data by a name or ID (like a database record).

PROJECT CONNECTION:
In the AI Creator Engine, conversation history is stored as a List of Dictionaries. Each dictionary represents one message, with keys for "role" (user or AI) and "content" (the message text).