TITLE: PYTHON MODULES AND PACKAGES

PURPOSE:
To explain how to organize code across multiple files and how to install external libraries.

WHAT IS IT?
A module is just a Python file (.py). A package is a folder full of modules. Python lets you "import" code from one file into another, or download code written by other people on the internet.

WHY IS IT USEFUL?
If you put all your code in one file, it will eventually become thousands of lines long and impossible to read. Modules let you split code into logical pieces. Packages let you use incredible tools (like AI models) without having to write them yourself.

CORE CONCEPTS:

module: A single Python file.

package: A directory of Python modules.

import: Loading a whole module into your script.

from ... import: Loading specific functions from a module.

pip: Python's package installer used in the command line.

virtual environments (venv): An isolated folder that holds dependencies for one specific project.

requirements.txt: A text file listing all the packages a project needs.

dependency isolation: Keeping project A's packages separate from project B's.

SIMPLE EXPLANATION:
A module is like a toolbox. You can bring the whole toolbox to your workbench (import math) and grab a tool out of it (math.sqrt()). Or, you can just bring exactly the tool you need directly to the bench (from math import sqrt).
pip is a hardware store where you download new toolboxes for free.

CODE EXAMPLES:

Importing a module:
import math
print(math.pi)

Importing specific functions:
from random import randint
print(randint(1, 10))  # Gets a random number between 1 and 10

Creating your own module:

In a file named 'helper.py'
def greet(name):
return f"Hi {name}"

In your main file 'app.py'
from helper import greet
print(greet("Alice"))

Command Line:

Installing a package
pip install flask

Saving requirements
pip freeze > requirements.txt

COMMON MISTAKES:

Naming your file the same as a built-in module: Never name your file math.py or json.py. Python will load your file instead of the real one, breaking everything.

Skipping virtual environments: If you don't use virtual environments, pip installs packages globally. Later, if two projects need different versions of the same package, they will break each other.

WHEN TO USE:
Use modules to separate your code (e.g., put all database logic in database.py and API routes in routes.py). Use virtual environments for every new project you start.

PROJECT CONNECTION:
The AI Creator Engine relies on a requirements.txt file and a virtual environment. It imports many external packages like flask, langchain, and chromadb.