TITLE: MATPLOTLIB DATA VISUALIZATION

PURPOSE:
To introduce how to create charts, graphs, and visual plots using Matplotlib.

WHAT IS IT?
Matplotlib is the most popular library in Python for creating static, animated, and interactive visualizations. It turns numbers into pictures.

WHY IS IT USEFUL?
Humans are bad at reading thousands of numbers in a table. A simple line chart or bar graph can instantly reveal trends, errors, and insights that numbers alone hide.

CORE CONCEPTS:

figure: The overall window or page that the chart is drawn on.

axes basics: The actual plot area (the X and Y axes).

line: Used to show changes over time.

bar: Used to compare different categories.

scatter: Used to show relationships between two different variables.

histogram: Used to show the distribution of data (e.g., age groups).

labels: Text explaining the X and Y axes.

title: The main heading of the chart.

legend: A key explaining what different colors or lines mean.

choosing appropriate charts: Knowing which graph fits which data.

SIMPLE EXPLANATION:
Matplotlib works like a painter on a canvas. You tell it: "Draw a canvas (figure), put a graph on it (axes), draw a line connecting these points, label the bottom 'Days', label the side 'Sales', and display it."

CODE EXAMPLES:

A Simple Line Chart:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

days = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
sales = [10, 15, 7, 20, 25]

Plot the data
plt.plot(days, sales, marker="o", color="blue", label="Store A")

Add labels and titles
plt.title("Weekly Sales")
plt.xlabel("Day of the Week")
plt.ylabel("Total Sales ($)")

Show the legend and display the graph
plt.legend()
plt.show()

COMMON MISTAKES:

Forgetting plt.show(): If you don't call this at the very end, Python will build the graph in memory but won't pop up the window for you to see it.

Choosing the wrong chart: Don't use a line chart for categories (like Apples vs Oranges). Use a bar chart instead! Line charts imply a continuous connection (like Time).

WHEN TO USE:
Use Matplotlib whenever you need to present data visually, check for anomalies in your datasets, or include charts in a report.

WHEN NOT TO USE:
If you need highly interactive dashboards for the web, JavaScript libraries (like Chart.js) or tools like Plotly might be better suited than standard static Matplotlib.

OFFICIAL RESOURCES:
Matplotlib Documentation: https://matplotlib.org/stable/