TITLE: RAG AND VECTOR RETRIEVAL

PURPOSE:
To explain Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)—how to give an AI model a memory of your private documents.

WHAT IS IT?
RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation) is a technique where you search your own documents for facts, and then paste those facts into the prompt before asking the AI a question. This stops the AI from hallucinating because it has an "open book" to read from.

WHY IS IT USEFUL?
LLMs are frozen in time; they don't know the news from today, and they don't know your company's private employee handbook. Instead of spending millions to re-train the AI, RAG lets the AI dynamically read your documents.

CORE CONCEPTS:

RAG: The overall system of searching for data and generating an answer.

document ingestion: Loading text, PDFs, or code into the system.

text extraction: Pulling the raw words out of the files.

chunking: Cutting a 100-page book into small 500-word paragraphs so the AI doesn't get overwhelmed.

overlap: Keeping a few sentences of overlap between chunks so concepts don't get cut in half.

embeddings: An AI model that turns a chunk of text into a long list of numbers (a vector) representing its meaning.

vector store (ChromaDB): A specialized database built to store and search through embeddings.

similarity search: Comparing the numbers of the user's question with the numbers of the chunks to find a match.

top-k retrieval: Grabbing the top 3 or 5 most relevant chunks.

metadata: Tags attached to a chunk (like "Author: Alice" or "Source: manual.txt").

context: The retrieved chunks that are pasted into the prompt.

prompt: "Answer the question using ONLY this context: [chunks]".

retrieval flow: Question -> Embed -> Search -> Inject -> Generate.

user ownership: Keeping vector databases local means your private data never leaves your computer.

RAG limitations: If the search step fails to find the right chunk, the AI cannot answer the question.

SIMPLE EXPLANATION:
RAG is taking an open-book test.

The user asks a question.

Python uses a Vector Database to quickly scan the textbook index and pull out the 3 most relevant paragraphs (Retrieval).

Python gives the AI the question AND the 3 paragraphs (Augmentation).

The AI reads the paragraphs and writes a clear answer (Generation).

EXAMPLES:

Retrieval Flow Logic (Conceptual):
query = "What is the company WiFi password?"

1. Turn query into numbers
query_vector = embed_model.encode(query)

2. Search database for closest matches
best_chunk = vector_db.search(query_vector)

3. Ask the AI
ai_prompt = f"Using this text: {best_chunk}, answer: {query}"
response = llm.generate(ai_prompt)

COMMON MISTAKES:

Chunking too big: If a chunk is 10,000 words, the AI might lose the important detail in the noise (called the "lost in the middle" problem).

Forgetting to embed the question: You must use the exact same embedding model to turn the user's question into numbers as you used for the documents, or they won't match mathematically.

WHEN TO USE:
Use RAG anytime you want an LLM to answer questions about private data, specific documentation, or up-to-date facts.

PROJECT CONNECTION:
The AI Creator Engine uses RAG. This exact Knowledge Base file is chunked, turned into embeddings via Sentence Transformers, stored in ChromaDB, and retrieved whenever you ask a question about the project!