PURPOSE:
To explain foundational version control workflows and essential Linux/WSL terminal commands for software development.

WHAT IS IT?
Git is a distributed version control tool that records changes to code over time. GitHub is a cloud platform for hosting Git repositories and collaborating with others. Linux/WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) is the operating system environment standard for modern software engineering.

WHY IS IT USEFUL?
Git allows you to experiment fearlessly. If an update breaks your app, you can roll back to a known working version instantly. Knowing basic terminal navigation allows you to configure servers, run scripts, manage packages, and automate tasks.

CORE CONCEPTS:

repository (repo): A directory tracked by Git containing all project files and history.

git status: Inspecting modified, untracked, and staged files.

git add: Staging files for the next commit snapshot.

git commit: Recording staged changes permanently in history with a descriptive message.

git log: Viewing past commit history.

git branch: Creating an isolated line of development to work on a feature.

git switch / checkout: Switching between branches.

git remote: Linking a local repository to a remote server like GitHub.

git pull: Fetching and merging updates from the remote repository to your machine.

git push: Uploading local commits to the remote repository.

git clone: Downloading an existing remote repository to your local machine.

pull request (PR): A proposal on GitHub to merge changes from one branch into another with code review.

Linux commands:

pwd: Print working directory (shows where you are).

ls: List files and folders.

cd: Change directory.

mkdir: Make a new directory.

cp: Copy files or directories.

mv: Move or rename files.

rm: Remove/delete files.

cat: Print file contents to the terminal.

grep: Search for text matching a pattern inside files.

python -m venv: Creating an isolated virtual environment.

SIMPLE EXPLANATION:
Git is like a video game save system. A commit is a save point you create when everything works. If you battle a boss (write a risky feature) and your program crashes, you don't start from scratch; you load your previous save point. GitHub is uploading your save game to cloud storage so you can share it or play from another computer.

EXAMPLES:

Everyday Git Workflow:

1. Check what changed
git status

2. Stage changes
git add app.py routes/chat.py

3. Commit changes with a clear message
git commit -m "Add input validation to /api/chat route"

4. Push to GitHub
git push origin main

Essential Terminal Commands:

Check current directory
pwd

Make a project folder and enter it
mkdir my_project
cd my_project

Create and activate a Python virtual environment on Linux/WSL
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

Search for a function across all Python files
grep -rn "generate_chat_response" .

COMMON MISTAKES:

Committing sensitive files (.env, database files, virtual environments). Always configure .gitignore first.

Writing vague commit messages such as "fixed stuff" or "update".

Running rm -rf without verifying the path; deleting files in the terminal bypasses the desktop trash can.

WHEN TO USE:
Use Git from the very first line of code in any project. Use the Linux command line whenever managing servers, virtual environments, or development workflows.

PROJECT CONNECTION:
AI Creator Engine is maintained as a Git repository, allowing developers to clone the project, install dependencies inside a Linux/WSL virtual environment, and track improvements systematically.

OFFICIAL RESOURCES:
Git Official Documentation: https://git-scm.com/doc
GitHub Documentation: https://docs.github.com/